# Correcting The Narrative Fallacy: A Balancing Act


Storytelling seems to be everyone's favorite thing in recent years. It helps businesses convey their messages, it helps people convey their ideas, heck, even personalities. The more you buy into your stories though, the further you fall down the rabbit hole. More often than not we end up being slaves to our narratives. Coherence and definitiveness become the primary objectives (unlike Game of Thrones), but as we know, real life is rarely coherent and it's usually full of plot holes (just like Game of Thrones). The extreme case of getting bamboozled by your own or someone else's story about how the world works is what has been dubbed [the narrative fallacy](https://wiki.lesswrong.com/wiki/Narrative_fallacy).  The bad news is we all do it. The good news is we can probably, at least occasionally, make some use of it.


## Our innate need to make sense of things


This is something we can't escape from. Things have to make sense to us if we are to go about our days and function normally. Manipulating the material world requires at least a basic understanding of its inherent logic (or lack thereof). As a farmer in Ancient Greece, you'd naturally wish for the best weather possible for your crops. So you do what any sensible farmer would do and you start praying to [Zeus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zeus) and/or [Demeter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demeter) and hope they'll cut you some slack this year. It's no coincidence that pretty much all early cultures build their religions and mythologies around natural phenomena and particularly those relating to the climate.

No one wants to admit they're totally helpless in the face of nature, so the next best thing to do is to give it some human characteristics and weave it all into a neat little narrative system. Yeah, the idea that some horny old man is throwing bolts of lightning at you from the sky is a bit of a stretch, but it helps you get rid of [that nagging feeling of uncertainty](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cognitive_dissonance), so you roll with it. It comes at a cost though, you end up with a fundamentally wrong model of how the world works (apologies to any pagans reading this). However, this is not at all where it backfires. There's nothing wrong with making up stuff as you go. After all, you need a workable theory of how stuff works to be able to influence it. The problem starts when you stop testing your theory and updating your model because you've become so convinced in that first draft of your story. Consequences can be mostly benign (*'I did the carrot diet and it was amazing!'*) or flat out idiotic (*'The earth is flat and if you say otherwise, we'll throw you in a dungeon!'*). It's a nasty business and it has even [made its way into science](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Publication_bias).

We tend to treat knowledge as something sacred, never to be spoken against, but in reality, [facts have a pretty short shelf-life](https://www.amazon.com/Half-Life-Facts-Everything-Know-Expiration/dp/159184651X) (think Newton, Vitamin C as a treatment for the common cold or [microwave safety](https://www.who.int/peh-emf/publications/facts/info_microwaves/en/)). What's more, even with the existing knowledge we've gathered, we're still more or less subject to life's inherent [uncertainty](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uncertainty). Essentially, is much more like poker than it is like chess. We may have agency (or at least a pretty good illusion thereof), but we still have to juggle with a shitload of variables we have no way of predicting or even knowing they exist. When you're choosing a career, you can research and ponder all you want and you still have absolutely no way of knowing how things will turn out. Even years into your chosen field you can still only do an approximate evaluation and you're still prone to rationalize stuff or even [invent things](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/False_memory) so they fit your current worldview.

The narrative fallacy can be dangerous in our day-to-day lives as well. We often find ourselves unable to accept chaos and default to some comforting confabulation that would make things feel okay, at least for a while. This is amplified by the abundance of great storytelling we have right at our fingertips. Over the years I have observed a special case of the narrative fallacy that has to do with tv, cinema, and fiction. Basically, people would get so immersed in a story, that they would try to emulate particular elements of the story in their own lives. Who doesn't want a best friend like Ted and Marshall from How I Met Your Mother? Or to be a badass-reluctant-warrior-destined-to-become-king-and-save-the-world like Aragorn? The stories we consume can sometimes influence us much more than we care to admit. That's how we get detrimental behavioral patterns like victim mentality,  low self-esteem, learned helplessness, you name it. Once you buy into the narrative, going back is hard because it's difficult. Doing the same and thinking the same are much easier and wouldn't require you to straighten out whatever cognitive dissonance and uncomfortable feelings may arise from the change.


## Stories provide meaning


All this is not to say that narratives are the end of the world. Quite the opposite. Any type of effective goal-setting would have a storytelling component. For example, if you're trying to lose weight, simply mapping out milestones and tracking calories is likely not going to cut it. The most important factor here would be diet adherence, which will be mainly dictated by the story you tell yourself to get there. Something along the lines of "I'm going to push myself now, so I can get super jacked for the beach this year" would go a long way in terms of motivation. Once you have that down, mechanistic stuff like exercising and calorie counting is pretty easy.

Personalities are another thing we basically construct ourselves to a large extent. True, there's always genetics and additional environmental factors, but at the end of the day, we more or less have a fixed narrative (or multiple ones) about who we are, where we come from and how we plan to develop in the future. Details may very well change with circumstances, but the whole thing still remains basically a story. This is perfectly fine as long as we are at least willing to reconsider the story in light of new evidence, which, for the most part, we're not that keen on doing. It makes sense if you think about it, we like our stories neatly wrapped up from beginning to end. Everything has to fit into place. Every character arc has to be resolved somehow. [Retconning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Retroactive_continuity) is generally frowned upon. No one was thrilled about Dumbledore suddenly being supposedly gay, just cause it was kinda cool, and don't get me started on Star Wars.

While great for films and literature, this can be flat out bad for life stories. Self-perpetuating is a terrible trap to fall into and at its core, it's just a narrative we refuse to give up. Things don't get better on a larger scale either. For-profit endeavors such as Scientology, Astrology, acupuncture, [neuro-linguistic programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neuro-linguistic_programming) (my personal favorite) are all nicely sounding stories, though largely discredited and potentially harmful.

## Don't connect the dots. Simply acknowledge them.
Correcting the narrative fallacy is a very slippery slope. The idea that stories can be dangerous is itself a story, which ought to be questioned from time to time. Along with the [standard debiasing techniques](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Debiasing), there's not a whole lot we can do to make sure we're on the safe side (the safe side meaning having the most possible model of the world given the available evidence).  One thing I like to do is to always remind myself to refrain from connecting the dots. When something happens that doesn't necessarily need a narrative attached to it, why not leave it as a floating data point?\
When you fail a test, why not acknowledge you failed the test and move on with studying, instead of falling down a spiral of self-doubt and quickly coming up with a poorly reconstructed biased sample of memories of other times you failed other tests? Without jumping to conclusions, why not wait for some more relevant data first?

It's hard and counterintuitive, but it's certainly better than nothing. The mere acknowledgment that we've entered storytelling mode can help us separate what we know for a fact and what our brains hurriedly want us to do with those facts. Inference is hard, but pseudo-inference doesn't take that much effort. It's simple, it makes sense and it's also usually wrong. There is no way we're ever getting rid of our tendency to tell and enjoy good stories. But we can surely learn a thing or two from those that don't really correspond to what's actually there and perhaps even manage to avoid similar mistakes in the future.
